---
title: I18n
category: OpenPaaS Core
order: 4
---

## Table of contents
{:.no_toc}

* Here is the ToC, this line is needed to generate...
{:toc}

Internationalization (i18n) is the process of developing products in such a way
that they can be localized for languages and cultures easily. OpenPaaS supports
i18n completely in both backend and frontend sides:
- In backend, we use [i18n-node](https://github.com/linagora/i18n-node)
- In frontend, we use [angular-translate](https://angular-translate.github.io/)

## Where are the locale files?

Locale files of the core module can be found in `backend/i18n/locales` directory.
Each module can have its own locale files, usually placed in `backend/lib/i18n/locales`
directory as in [Calendar](https://github.com/linagora/linagora.esn.calendar/tree/master/backend/lib/i18n/locales)
module for example.

Currently, supported languages are English, French and Vietnamese.

## Backend translation

When to use:
- Translate _static_ string in .pug files
- Translate string in Node.js files, for example: translate an email before sending
it to recipients.

### Translate static string in .pug files

It is pretty easy to translate phrases in .pug files:

```pug
h2 #{__('Good morning!')}
```

Simple string interpolation:

```pug
h2 #{__('Hello %s, good morning!', 'John')}
```

Angular expression string interpolation:

```pug
h2 #{__('Hello %s, good morning!', '{{user.name}}')}
```

HTML string interpolation:

```pug
p.empty-text !{__('No application, click %s to add a new one', '<span class="mdi mdi-plus"></span>')}
```

### Translate string in Node.js files

Simply require the module in `backend/core/i18n`:

```javascript
const i18n = require('...');
const subject = i18n.__('Your password has been changed!');
```

Check the documentation of [i18n-node](https://github.com/linagora/i18n-node) for more examples.

## Frontend translation

When to use:
- Translate Angular variable in .pug files
- Translate string in Javascript files

You can either use `esnI18n` filter or `esnI18nService` of `esn.i18n` module to
translate your phrases.

### Translate Angular variable in .pug files

```pug
span {{mailbox.name | esnI18n}}
```

### Translate string in Javascript files

```js
// inject the esnI18nService service
var subject = esnI18nService.translate('Email sent to %s', $scope.recipient.email).toString();
```

The `esnI18nService.translate` function returns an instance of `EsnI18nString`, which
will be useful when you want to know whether the string is translated or not:

```js
function notify(message) {
  message = esnI18nService.isI18nString(message) ? message.toString() : esnI18nService.translate(message).toString();
  window.alert(message);
}
// Usage
notify('Hello world!');
// OR
notify(esnI18nService.translate('Hello %s!', user.name));
```

## Translation validator

OpenPaaS uses a built-in validator based on [i18n-checker](https://github.com/linagora/i18n-checker) package
to ensure the quality of internationalization in product.

To use the validator, simply run: `grunt i18n`
